add security self-assessment document (#456)
metal3-io/metal3-docs: security/self-assessment.md

* [Project compliance](#project-compliance)
* [Secure development practices](#secure-development-practices)
* [Security issue resolution](#security-issue-resolution)
* [Appendix](#appendix)

## Metadata

|                   |                                              |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| Assessment Stage  | In Progress                                  |
| Software          | <https://github.com/metal3-io/>              |
| Security Provider | No                                           |
| Languages         | Go, Bash, Python                             |
| SBOM              | Metal3 does not generate SBOMs currently     |

### Security links

| Document      | URL                                              |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| Security file | <https://book.metal3.io/security_policy>         |

## Overview

The Metal3 Project (pronounced: “Metal Kubed”) empowers organizations with a
flexible, open-source solution for bare metal provisioning that combines the
benefits of bare metal performance with the ease of use and automation provided

> by Kubernetes. Metal3 provides comprehensive set of components for baremetal
> host management with Kubernetes so that a user can enroll user's baremetal
> machines, provision operating system images, deploy Kubernetes clusters on them
> and maintain the lifecycle of the kubernetes cluster, baremetal server and
> applications all through kubernetes native APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by Kubernetes. Metal3 provides a comprehensive set of components for baremetal
host management with Kubernetes, so that a user can enroll baremetal
machines, provision operating system images, deploy Kubernetes clusters on them
and manage the lifecycle of the Kubernetes cluster, baremetal server and
applications, all through Kubernetes native APIs.
```

### Background

Metal3 is an open-source technology which enables users to provision and

> maintain a baremetal server's lifecycle using Kubernetes native APIs. There are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manage a baremetal server's lifecycle using Kubernetes native APIs. There are
```

Reviewer: Forgotten?

managing your infrastructure just like your applications, is a powerful next
step in the evolution of infrastructure management.

The Metal3 project is also building integration with the Kubernetes Cluster API
project, allowing Metal3 to be used as an infrastructure backend for Machine
objects from the Cluster API. These components integrate seamlessly to leverage
the Kubernetes ecosystem and automate the provisioning and management of
bare-metal infrastructure.

This is paired with one of the components from the OpenStack ecosystem, Ironic
for booting and installing machines. Metal³ handles the installation of Ironic
as a standalone component (there’s no need to bring along the rest of
OpenStack). Ironic is supported by a mature community of hardware vendors and
supports a wide range of bare metal management protocols which are continuously
tested on a variety of hardware. Backed by Ironic, Metal³ can provision
machines, no matter the brand of hardware.

### Actors

Metal3 as a project bundles the following actors together:

#### Cluster API provider Metal3 (CAPM3)

The Cluster API brings declarative, Kubernetes-style APIs to cluster creation,

> configuration and management. The API itself is shared across multiple cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration and management. The API itself is shared across multiple infrastructure
```

Author: Done in next push.

providers. Cluster API Provider Metal3(CAPM3) is one such provider for Cluster
API which enables users to deploy a Cluster API based cluster on top of bare

> metal infrastructure using Metal3. In one hand it acts as a plugin for Custer
> API and brings in the flexibility of simplified kubernetes cluster management,
> and on the other hand it interfaces with Baremetal operator (a controller which
> manages Baremetal Host API) to manage baremetal servers lifecycle through simple
> kubernetes native APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metal infrastructure using Metal3. On the one hand it acts as a plugin for Custer
API and brings in the flexibility of simplified Kubernetes cluster management,
and on the other hand it interfaces with Baremetal operator (a controller which
manages Baremetal Host API) to manage baremetal servers' lifecycle through simple
Kubernetes native APIs.
```

Author: Done in next push.

#### IP Address Manager (IPAM)

> The IP Address Manager (IPAM) is actor in Metal3 which manages static IP
> allocations for baremetal hosts. IPAM handles allocations of IP subnet according
> to the requests without handling any use of those addresses. The IPAM adds the
> flexibility by providing the address right before provisioning the node. It can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IP Address Manager (IPAM) is an actor in Metal3 which manages static IP
allocations for baremetal hosts. IPAM handles allocations of IPs from subnets according
to the requests without handling any use of those addresses. IPAM adds the
flexibility by providing the address right before provisioning the node. It can
```

> IPAM adds the flexibility by providing the address right before provisioning the node.

I'm not understanding this sentence. How is it providing flexibility?
Maybe we can change it to a continuation on the previous. Something like

```
IPAM simply keeps track of IP pools and allocations. It is then up to the consumers to act on the information.
```

Author: @kashifest I think this is from you, what do you think?

Reviewer 2: I am ok with @lentzi90's suggestion

Author: Discussed with Kashif offline, we go with your suggestion.

Fixed now.

   performing security checks on credentials and configurations
1. BMO interacts with Ironic using authenticated API calls to execute the actual
   provisioning operations
1. IPAM manages IP address allocation requests securely through IPAddress custom
   resources
1. All component interactions happen through the Kubernetes API server,
   inheriting its authentication and authorization controls

The security boundary between components is maintained through:

* Kubernetes RBAC controls for API access
* Authentication between components
* Mutual TLS configuration
* Validation of all inputs before processing
* Secure storage of sensitive data like BMC credentials in Kubernetes secrets

### Goals

There are a number of great open source tools for bare metal host provisioning,
including Ironic. Metal3 aims to build on these technologies to provide a
Kubernetes native API for managing bare metal hosts via a provisioning stack
that is also running on Kubernetes. We believe that Kubernetes Native
Infrastructure, or managing your infrastructure just like your applications, is
a powerful next step in the evolution of infrastructure management.

> The Metal3 project is also building integration with the Kubernetes cluster-api

Reviewer: "building integration" sounds like we don't have it fully working yet to me
```suggestion
The Metal3 project is also an infrastructure provider with the Kubernetes cluster-api
```

Author: Agree, it can be understood differently. I'll address that.

Reviewer: Forgotten?

* Exposing full set of Ironic features

## Self-assessment use

This self-assessment is created by the Metal3 team to perform an internal
analysis of the project's security.  It is not intended to provide a security
audit of Metal3, or function as an independent assessment or attestation of
Metal3's security health.

This document serves to provide Metal3 users with an initial understanding of
Metal3's security, where to find existing security documentation, Metal3
plans for security, and general overview of Metal3 security practices, both
for development of Metal3 as well as security of Metal3.

This document provides the CNCF TAG-Security with an initial understanding of
Metal3 to assist in a joint-assessment, necessary for projects under
incubation.  Taken together, this document and the joint-assessment serve as a
cornerstone for if and when Metal3 seeks graduation and is preparing for a
security audit.

## Security functions and features

**Critical**

* Ironic: Ironic is the ultimate component which provisions the bare metal
   hosts, talks to the real hardware and is able to perform very destructive or
   malicious actions.

> **Security Relevant**

Reviewer: I think we could mention CAPM3 here also. It currently has cluster-wide access to all bare metal hosts as part of its RBAC. (There are initiatives for improving this...)

Author: Which all elements contain sensitive information in BMH? UserData? BMC secret is only referenced, right?

Reviewer: I was mainly thinking that since it can interact with the BMHs then it can also make the hardware do what it wants. Similar to how Ironic is listed as critical. CAPM3 may not have quite that deep access but it can make the servers boot malicious images for sure.

Author: OK, let's add CAPM3.

Author: Done in next push.

* Ironic Python Agent (IPA): Ironic's agent counterpart that is responsible for
   doing initial bootstrapping of the node.
* Bare Metal Operator (BMO): Currently BMO has cluster-wide K8s Secret access
   so it can read BMC secrets from any namespace. This is needed as access to
   BareMetalHost CRDs which are separated from the secrets, to enable role
   separation for the users and admins.

## Project compliance

The Metal3 project does not comply with any specific security standard.

## Secure development practices

**Development Pipeline**

* We run many linters and unit tests first, then e2e suite as required. If
   PR is touching a major feature, we run optional e2e feature suite. Most
   testing is configured via

>    [Prow config](https://github.com/metal3-io/project-infra/blob/main/prow/manifests/overlays/metal3/config.yaml)

Reviewer: Link needs updating (sorry :see_no_evil: )

Author: Good catch, I'll update.

Author: Done in next push.
